---
layout: post
title: Ichthyophthirius multifiliis
categories: [aquarium]
tags: [disease]
date: 2015-04-03 20:05:49-04:00
---

Refs:

* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ichthyophthirius_multifiliis
* http://www.livingreefs.com/threads/oh-no-i-have-ich-what-do-i-do.30950/
* http://www.cichlid-forum.com/articles/ich.php
* http://www.skepticalaquarist.com/ichthyophthirius

Yes - an aquarium hobby is fun.  You have some nice looking pets; then think - hey - I should get more beautiful fish for my awesome tank.  Then WHAM.  ich.

So I've been doing this for around 7 years now - ich has hit me twice.  Both times when introducing new fish to the aquarium from a reputable fish store.  So - Mike! - next time just wait the incubation period calmly!  this could have been easier.


## 45 Gallon Tank

I have a 45 gallon tank - with some 5 pond goldfish/koi; a large pleco; 2 black tetras; and 2 albino buenos aires tetras.  Some are here to stay, some are only here for the winter - they mostly get along.

The introduction of the tetras and plants occurred at the same time.  The plants were from a separate plant only tank in the fish store; and from what I've been reading - ich doesn't survive without a host to complete the life cycle... so I blame those little tetras for my troubles.


Suffice to say - i'm half venting here.  Both from frustration and kicking myself cause I knew I should have separated and waited the incubation period.  Anyhoo - here I am.  A 45 gallons of ich infected fish.

## The solution

Using the API "Liquid Super Ick Cure".  It is a 5ml to 5 gallon ratio solution; then after 48 hours apply it again.  After another 48 hours gravel vaccuum and replace 1/3 water.  Caveat here of my own notes - rinse repeate the directions if fish still have observable trophonts (white spots on skin).


Sure - so I'm now into my second application and 8 hours into the 48 hour wait.  The first dose definitely did something.  I started with all fish exhibiting the tell-tale white spots; and now have only 1 albino and 1 large goldfish/koi showing the bumps - and no deaths (yet)!  Last time I went through this -

* I didn't know what it was
* By the time I realized something was going wrong, 1 fish had already died.
* Apparently a dead fish from ich is some sort of super spore breading ground.  
* And around 96 hours later - I had no fish.  even tho I had started treatment. :[

This time I caught it early - and the future is looking good.

## Myths and facts

Won't repost the lifecycle image here - [but you can find it here](http://www.livingreefs.com/threads/oh-no-i-have-ich-what-do-i-do.30950/).

* Trophonts (the parastic stage under the skin) doesn't get affected by the medication
* Always keep treating until the last 48 hours after the last observable Trophont "white spot"
* Encystment (the disassociated trophont free from the host) will breakdown under medicated water
* Excystment (the free swimming hatched tomites) die in medicated water
* The Encystment stage does not have (an optional) dormant stage - that is - after a certain period the parasite consumes all its energy if it doesn't find a new host to complete the lifecycle.  This period can sway between 3-28 days apparently due to temperature.  It then dies.
* The Encystment doesn't live outside of water for very long - ie. drying nets and whatnot is a good idea.
* Raised temperature hastens the lifecycle speed.  So raising temp during medicated water will speed the process.
* Safely assume all foriegn fish have Ich!  quarenteen, and treat with copper solution.
* Tormonts are invisible to naked eye until they are nearly ready to pop into encystment stage.
